
Bid Invite Received - Task > Identify Go/No Go 
Invite comes via email to management and uploads to Monday's Board 
Bid documents are open and reviewed, determining a list of Go/No Go's
Things to consider in evaluating invites
Size and Nature of Scope (INFO FROM DRAWINGS)
Timing of project (Project narrative or RFI to GC) 
Who's funding the project? (Gov funded vs private funding) 
Location
Competition
Spec Book DQs
Davis Bacon Wages (UNION)
AWI QCP CERTIFICATION
Pre-approved vendors
Lab Manufactured Casework

Project Set- Up
Create Estimate Folder on Server, organized by Job Name 
Copy the contents of "Template" Folder into new Job Folder
Download files from email invite and save an appropriate folder
Drawings
Spec Book
Project Schedule
RFIs
Addendums
Update Monday's Board with what bids are currently in progress

Drawing Set Up (BLUEBEAM)
Page turn through drawings to get a big picture understanding of the entire project. if a project schedule isn't provided, understanding the whole project will help make an educated assumption on when they might need our product.
Create Page Labels
Top Right - Thumbnails Tab (4 small square symbol)
Click "U" shape with yellow star under
Select "Page Region"
Click and Hold, drawing a rectangle over the Page Number (A110) 
Click "OK" twice
Set Scale on appropriate drawings 
Top Left Tool Bar - (Small ruler symbol) .i Click "Preset" Dot and open the drop-down menu
Find the correct scale by looking at the scale determined by the architect - usually on bottom left or right of drawing

Complete Takeoff (BlueBeam) 
Using the floor plans, elevations, and section details, compile a takeoff using the following quantities (Small Tool Chest Symbol on Right Tool Bar)
Base Cab Linear Feet
Wall Cab Linear Feet
Counter Square Feet (ADD 20% Waste MIN) 
Wall/Ceiling Paneling Square Feet
Die Wall Linear Feet
Upholstery Square Yards (Square Feet / 9)
Base Molding, Door Casing, Crown Molding Linear Feet 
Common practice has you starting at the entry door and working your way through the building, room by room, ensuring you will put your eyes on every wall/detail available on the drawings. Highlight or cross off rooms as you complete the takeoff.
Locate the "FINISH SCHEDULE" to determine what materials are being spec'd on this project. (PLAM, Solid Surface, Quartz, Wood Paneling, etc)
While working through the drawings, make note of any exclusions, questions, or concerns you see while completing the takeoff.
Any materials not clearly labeled
Any materials on a casework item that Sudberry does not perform (Wall Covering, Acoustical Paneling, etc)
Any details that will need to be reworked
Any trouble items that will need in-depth detail before construction starts

Transfer Takeoff from Bluebeam to Bid Recap (BLUEBEAM >EXCEL) 
Organize by room name/number
Enter takeoffs, per room, into the corresponding line item on EXCEL
Die Wall Framing Base Cab
Wall Cab
Paneling
Counters
Trim
Best practice is to list material selections into each line item
For example, Line Item "Base Cab" should be changed to PLAM-1 Base Cab, if material is selected and labeled.
Doing this will eliminate a step in the handoff meeting when determining a sheet good count.

Final Touches on Bid Recap (EXCEL)
Double check, - TRIPLE CHECK - all quantities, elevations, floor plans, RCP, sections.
Adjust shop labor as necessary. Bid Recap template is set for the following standard calculations for labor:
Die Wall Fabrication Time - 40 Hours per wall
Casework - 2.25 hours per Linear Foot
Paneling - FS Count / 32 *8 (Total square foot divided by 32 sf 1( PANEL) multiplied by 8 hours (8 hours per panel)
Counters - SF Count / 30 * 16 (Total square foot divided by 30 1(solid surface sheet) multiplied by 16 hours (2 days per sheet)
Consider duration and equipment needed for installation. There are a couple routes you can go here:
Price by the hour and crew size (TYP. 2 man crew size at $90/HR)
Price by LNF ($50/LNF)
Linear Foot Price for Trim Install ($3-$9/LNF)
Mixture of all
Pricing by the hour and crew size is beneficial for die walls, counter installations, paneling installation.
Box count is beneficial for all casework
Install sub-contractors will price trim install by the linear foot ranging from $3-$9 depending on the complexity of the profile and piece count.
After your initial pass of install costs, determine a duration of install by dividing the total dollar amount by 90 ($133,300 / $90/hr = 1,481 hours)
Divide your answer by your crew size to determine total
Divide your total hours by 40 to determine total weeks (740 Hours /40 hours in 1week = 18.5 weeks)
Now that you have a total week count, take another look at the whole job, and use common sense/teamwork to decide if this is adequate for the job. Adjust as needed.
Consider location if mileage needs to be priced, rental cars, hotel stays, etc
Consider/Communicate with drafting and CNC programming team to determine time needed to complete job
Typical Metrics to double check your overall number:
General Conditions - 2-8% of total value
Material - 25-40% of total value
Shop Labor - 12% of total value
Installation - 8-10% of total value
When looking at Material vs Shop Labor, ratio tends to float around the 60/40, material to labor (i.e. If Material Costs are $100,000, labor is typically in the $40,000-$60,000 mark.
Historical data tells us competitors will range from $250- $600/LNF on cabinets. This metric does not include install. Use this as backup for your number. On jobs that we want to get more aggressive, shoot for the $300/LNF mark. This isn't always 100% accurate, but it's close enough to be a benchmark for review.

7. Draft Proposal - (MicrosoftWord)
In the "Bid Proposal" Folder, rename the file 'Job Name - Sudberry Millwork - Proposal_Template' to correct nomenclature.
i.e. (Marriot Hotel - Sudberry Millwork - Proposal) 
Open file, starting at the top
Change the "Proposal Submitted To:" to the person receiving your proposal
Under the name of the person, enter ni the company name, address, phone number and email
Change the "Job Name:" text to the correct job name along with the project address.
In the body of the text, change the highlighted dollar value to the correct dollar from your bid recap.
Change the '‹General Contractor> in the body of the text to the correct GC receiving the bid. (Sudberry Millwork proposes to complete the scope of work... for <General Contractor>...)
Clean up the excel sheet hiding any unused lines and copy the proposal.
Adjust the exclusions as necessary, including anything out of the ordinary you spotted while making the bid.
Adjust the submission date and 'Good till Date, on the bottom
PDF proposal and save in server under 'Submitted Docs'
Draft an email to GC(s) and insert your PDF attachment. Use the body of the email to reiterate any exclusions, lead times, or potential gaps your competitors might have.